---
title: U Blueprints
description: RAW
categories:
  - PXL
tags:
  - Unreal
  - Tech
  - Animation
  - RealTime
  - GameDev
permalink: /ubp/
aliases:
  - ubp
---
Related notes: [Unreal Code](/ucode/) [Code](/code/) 

{% comment %} [[04-01-01-Code]]  [[05-01-01-U_Code]] [[09-01-01-U_Optimisation]]  [[10-01-01-U_PCG]] {% endcomment %}

https://benui.ca/unreal/subsystem-singleton/
**size map** - on BP to check dependencies
# Methodology
- don't make logic and asset in same place !
- have a native parent class
- avoid references assets - soft ref / cast to type create hard ref to this type

------
# Nomenclature

## Tick
delay
`dumpticks` - list all ticking
 no Tick - timeline
## Events 
for latent (later) executions
    - `Begin Play` -
    - `Destory` -
    - `Trigger` -
    - `Tick` with delta (time elapsed from last call)
## Event Dispatchers 
can subscribe and fire when triggered
- cad define in data tab.  
- to subscribe you bind dispatcher. can have many
## Interfaces
- enforce structure , separation of concern 
can communicate with other interfaces
can avoid casting 
## Tags

## Abilities

----
# Actor

## Actor
- Can be spawned or loaded with level,
- Can make child's
- Can inherent components.
- Can be used ad component
## Scene Component
- attachments ...
- can hierarchy and support transform to parent
## Actor component
-  more abstract don't support transform
- used for path finding, movement.....

---
# Blueprints
Blueprint Classes - create custom game object / prefabs
#### Function 
similar to programing. execute code in frame was called.
- can communicate between BP. (can call from any but no: time /. delay )
- is processed once
- cheapest
#### Macro  
collapse nodes.  better use fn. but support more than one exec pin (for logic)
- more expensive
- only in one BP cant communicate
- can delay anf time event
- for repetition things

#### Casting
when csting to objevt > casting to bp > so loading entire BP to memo

if not using `csat to :` resoult but only check if cast is succesfull (to check type) use:
- `has matching gameplay tag`
- `is actor of class`
- because `cast to` can pull ref to casting type.


---

# Communicate between BP

## Direct
## Dispatcher
## Interface

- Create BP actor witch ray
  - Ray trace > break: hit actor `Does implement Interface` node to check
- Create `BP Interface`Actor - event that create interface between BP

---

## Logic
Loops, Gates, Do once, Seq   

---

# Memory management

Clear intermediate BP and component to not have any ref, because all of them would be loaded wit BP   
CAn set Abstract !!!   
can only ref assets belonging to level ??!   
its good to move functionality to C++
## References to Assets


- actor ref - will load child and partnt  (specific obj) <<
- class ref - load children


#### Direct reference
are loaded whenever BP is loaded.

(reference viewer, and size map tools) !!!!


when wand where load to memory. Dependencies:
- `hard` will load whole asset. Attaching object to BP. Load in memory whenever BP is loaded. (hierarchical cascading )

#### Soft references
- delay load. Will not force, u must them explicitly load them


- `soft` 'link' is storing location.  Different way to acces it.
Lod soft
    - async load asset  (for individual or whole class)
    - cast to class
    - set (component to new mesh loaded to memory)
    - set to hard variable
Unload
  - no way > can destroy actor.
  - can threat like any uobject

  ( when created ref of given type, u need to load type to know that its soft )

#### inheretance
- Child BP implititly reference their patern classes and any asst they reference





---


# Debug
Print
Brak Point
Watch Value
Header Tool (5.1)

-------------

# Editor scripting

#### Construction Script
Can do anything -
- keep it self contained for safety !
better do in blutility/utiliti widg/

#### Action utilitie blueprints (Action utilitie)
  - Context menu buttons with functions.
- Asset actions / content browser context / level editor context

Things like :
  - remove material overrides
  - if sth match class ....

- `RMB` events in level or browser


#### Editor utility Widgets
Edit tools. can help automate tasks. Can dock in UI.


- in background listening
(like content validation)




#### Blutiliyy  buttons


#### Acttor Action Utilities

#### Console comands
console comands & python

#### Asset validators


------
BP notes


set timer by event >> (delay) >> clear and invalidate timer by handle


----


# Slate / UI

https://twitter.com/Mike_Prinke/status/1570065544774041600




# Blueprints
For content references visual stuff and simple functionalites. begining load at use . With all references, lib and obj.
C++ load at begining, use for larg math / saves / platform specyfic / controls / hjardwar SDK integrations  / ticks /

BP are signifient slower than C++ (to x10) depend on mode: PIE > Dev Play > Pack > Buiild    
Cost in number of nodes / casting / circular ref  Loops and itterations expensive
Use Events when possible  
Async load of obj. by map assets     



https://romeroblueprints.blogspot.com/p/table-of-contents.html
